tombick says, "In 1996 when I was preparing for the Pauline workshop at St.
 Stephen's I had provided a couple of other musicians with the A&D score and
 another PO score that was significantly less determinate. ..."
tombick says, "One of the other musicians who is quite accomplished in new
 music composition and improv work (but who certainly should be nameless if
 you use this anecdote) ..."
tombick says, "looked at both scores. i suggested we do A&D because it seemed
 clearer. She asked "What was the difference?"  In scanning the textual
 directions, she had just missed the fixed pitch aspect of A&D."
tombick says, "I think that anecdote was a good reminder to me that even
 really experienced performers of new music can sometimes miss important
 details in the score. It always pays off to look carefully and analytically."
tombick says, "The other PO score was "Soundfishes""

tombick says, "We performed it with PO (accordion), me (recorders), Anne
 LeBaron (harp and Korean harps), Andras Goldinger (guitar) and Ronald Stolk
 (organ). ..."
tombick says, "We layered it into a sequence that I think went: opening PO
 solo; DC Air; A&D; closing group improv led by PO."
tombick says, "We rehearsed it on a Fri night and performed it on Saturday
 afternoon"
tombick says, "Ronald, Anne, Andras and I all looked carefully at the scores
 together and seperately, but didn't sound together before the rehearsal."
tombick says, "We all used a lot of scalar and leaping movement. The plucked
 strings did little sustaining of course; Ronald covered the range of the
 organ..."
tombick says, "I used some extended techniques, but mostly monophonic playing
 on renaissance tenor recorder; PO seemed to use mostly monophonic movement
 too, over the range of the instrument."
tombick says, "It surprised me that the directions seemed really clear to
 Ronald and to me, and Andras and Anne seems the ones who stuggled a bit with
 what the options were. But they both grasped them very well and performed
 subtly and beatifully."
tombick says, "And that reminds me that the sounds were generally quiet. Also
 layered along with this was Lisa Mages and Kaaren Holum walking in the side
 chapels singing a text that Ione provided, just gently monotoning the words.
 Ione also did the appearances and disappearances part by theatrically poppin
 in and out of the audience's view."

You ask, "did you find that others were taking cues off of each other?"
You ask, "in that, was it more like ensemble playing, or several people
 performing simultaneous solos?"
You say, "in Comma, I feel like we're approaching it as an ensemble, but I
 wonder what PO's approach was in that respect."

tombick says, "Those are good questions, especially in view of Mike
 Benedetti's comment. I think we were listening to each other in the 1996
 performance (on Sat. too!). We were spread around the large space and moving
 through it. We listened very intently and definitely played off of each
 other."
tombick . o O ( yes, more like ensemble playing )

You ask, "did you talk with PO afterwards about the piece?"

tombick says, "I don't remember much specifics about A&D vs the other pieces.
 She expressed pleasure at the whole performance."

tombick says, "I'm happy to help answer other questions as they arise. Also
 you could contact Ronald Stolk if that seems useful. He has had a great deal
 of success as an improviser in the organ tradition, and brought that
 experience with him to this piece."

rstolk@capaccess.org

X-Authentication-Warning: purple.tmn.com: tbickley owned process doing -bs
Date: Fri, 23 Jan 1998 09:52:10 -0500 (EST)
From: Tom Bickley <tbickley@artswire.org>
To: Matthew Ross Davis <mrd@artswire.org>
Subject: Re: A&D

Hi Matt,
	I really enjoyed discussing A&D with you. I figured the DU
connection went squirrelly. Mine did too. I'm happy to respond to these!

On Thu, 22 Jan 1998, Matthew Ross Davis wrote:

> 1. Do you know if the score has been published?
	I believe that it is available from Deep Listening publications.
That info should be available from their online catalog. The score we're
using is one that Pauline emailed to me.

> 2. Do you know if it was originally written with instruments or voices
> in mind? 
	Pauline told me that she originally conceived of it as an
instrumental piece.

> 3. How do you think this piece relates to PO's Deep Listening Pieces and
> Sonic Meditations?
	She's described this as a piece for advanced/professional
musicians as opposed to the DL pieces and Sonic Meditations, most of which
could be done by anyone interested and do not require a particular level
of musical expertise.  She talks a bit about that in her article "Deep
Listening Chorus" which is in the first issue of NewMusNet on the artswire
NewMusNet site.

> 4. Is there a theatrical or visual element in the performance of this piece?
	I don't know if there originally was, but when we did it in DC,
those of us sounding moved throughout the space (a theatrical element),
and an important visual/theatrical aspect was Ione appearing and
disappearing from the view of the audience.

> 5. Do you feel like the study of Deep Listening with PO aided your
> performance of the piece?
	Yes, definitely! Perhaps most importantly because that study
increases my awareness of listening as part of my "toolkit" as a musician.
Obviously we all listen to some degree as musicians, but from the DL work
I am always drawn to listen mindfully. That increases my pleasure in
performing AND it increases my acuity with the pitch aspect. Also it makes
a stronger link between the directed "imagine an approach" and the
sounding of that approach.

X-Authentication-Warning: purple.tmn.com: tbickley owned process doing -bs
Date: Fri, 9 Jan 1998 11:44:42 -0500 (EST)
From: Tom Bickley <tbickley@artswire.org>
To: comma -- Joseph Zitt <jzitt@humansystems.com>, mrd@artswire.org
cc: Lisa Mages <LMAGES@crs.loc.gov>
Subject: Re: Advanced Retreat (fwd)
Status: RO
X-Status: 

HOORAY! THIS is helpful (if minimal) feedback from an important source!
-Tom

*     disciplined reading       *
*  haiku structures perception  *	tbickley@artswire.org
*     disciplined writing       *

---------- Forwarded message ----------
Date: Fri, 9 Jan 1998 12:38:42 +0100
From: Pauline Oliveros <paulineo@deeplistening.org>
To: Tom Bickley <tbickley@artswire.org>
Subject: Re: Advanced Retreat

Thanks Tom,

I listened to your cassette while I was dispensing the letters to DLers! It
sounds good. I liked your approach to aooroaches and departures! I'll be
looking forward to the CD.

I really enjoyed our evenings in Houston. There was some nice sharing.

Sekou came over and read a book of his Haiku. It was really beautiful.

All best wishes to you and to Lisa.

PO

>Dear Pauline,
>        Yes, I am planning on attending the advanced retreat this year!
>And thanks again for the good communing in Houston. Pax et bonum, -Tom
>
>*     disciplined reading       *
>*  haiku structures perception  *       tbickley@artswire.org
>*     disciplined writing       *
