Improvisation

Use in learning

Parallel to acting - improvisation of stage performers in movement and text, being able to accomodate adjustments both internally (mood, attitude, emotion) and externally (other players, environment)

Beyond ornamentation

Fueled by personal creativity, blurring the role of the composer versus the performer

The role of improvisation in performance and education

Examples of using improvisation in contemporary song literature

Free improvisation

Guided improvisation

Extended Vocal Techniques

The tools of improvisation available to the vocalist

Importance of improvisation in music NOT ONLY as a method for performing early music or attempting to recreate earlier performance practices, but also as a method of performance in our own day and age; where the singer once again becomes the foundiation of compositional practice -- performer as composer.

In relation to - Jazz - extemporaneous counterpoint
What 'expectations' are there? What is musical about, what is interesting, engaging, and exciting?

Improvisation frees the artistic individuality and personality of the singer -- relieving them of the role as a 'commodity' which opera houses trade like baseball players.

---

A. The nature of the improvising voice. Presenting a short history of how the singer has functioned as an improvisor, and pointing out that this paper will focus on music in a non-jazz tradition. Include performers and other composers which have included themselves in this tradition, focussing briefly on vocal improvisation in different types of music:
	Robert Ashley - opera
	John Cage - structural
Another point to bring up would be the relationship between the improvising singer and the composer, esp. in early music. Extemporaneous counterpoint, the demands placed on singers, etc. The ability to improvise as a soloist considered the ultimate form of viruosity.


B. The reason for focussing on improvisation in the voice. That is, why should singers improvise?


C. The nature of text and the improvising singer


D. Examine each of the pieces and the improvisational processes involved therein.

John Cage, Solo for Voice 52 (Aria No. 2) [from Song Books]
Improvisation as a guide for performance.
The soloist is confronted with a graphical score where no traditional notation appears, and pitch and rhythm are at best only generally indicated. The virtuoso of style and creativeness. An example of how a soloist can use improvisation to aid in the interpretation of a work.

John Zorn, Cobra
Improvisational games.
Performers are called upon to improvise according to personal style preferences and interactions with other performers according to extremely specific rules and structures. Again, a virtuoso of style, but within the context of immediate situations and truly improvisational, extemporaneous music making.

Pauline Oliveros
Free form improvisation.
Textual scores provide for freely interpreted form and function. Among the scores to be examined with be "Approaches and Departures" and "...."

Comma
Scoreless, free improvisation.
Where the musicians simply improvise freely without any predetermined form or style.


D. Conclusions. Improvisation should become a standard in the music curriculum. Not only being able to ornament and perform cadenzas, but also to emphasize the importance of each musicians creative musical spirit. If opera singers only want to focus on the quality of their tone and perfection of their technique, then at the very least a course in improvisation would open them up to how they can apply their technique in a creative and meaningful manner. Improvisation for actors is REQUIRED learning - why should a musician's training be any different? In learning how improvisation works on the stage, actors learn how to listen, how to observe, how to adjust to an immediate circumstance, and most importantly how to think on their feet. It is regarded as an essential part of the training process in acting.
