[Image]

     The sublime cacophony of John Zorn's Cobra has, since its 1984
     debut, allowed inspired improvisations in the downtown world of
     avant-garde music. One of Zorn's "gamepiece" compositions, where
     about eight to 12 musicians improvise, joust, and parry around and
     away from melody, harmony, and tumult, Cobra is as much a product
     of the musicians as of composer or conductor. Indeed, the role of
     conductor has been replaced in Cobra by that of a prompter, who
     fields various signals and suggestions from the musicians and is
     able to steer the game only so far as the performers will allow.
     Beginning in 1992, Cobra was performed once a month at New York
     City's Knitting Factory, incorporating dozens of musicians and
     creating a body of music as infinite in variation and extreme in
     derivations as the work of John Cage or TKO.

     Norman Yamada, a downtown musician and composer, acted as prompter
     throughout the 1992 performances, which were issued on compact
     disc by the Knitting Factory Works label in April of this year.
     Yamada, who also co-produced the disc, spoke with Voyager about
     Cobra, shedding some light and perspective on what stands as a
     singularly arduous achievement: capturing in an intransitive,
     unalterable, and permanent form a performance that had heretofore
     existed only so that it might change, and that's performed only to
     undo what's been done before.

     ------------------------------------------------------------------

     Voyager: How did you come to the Cobra sessions?
     Yamada: Basically the way the project came about was through
     Anthony Coleman, who feels that Cobra is a milestone piece for
     John. It's a very important gamepiece of John's. After 1984 and
     '85, when he really played it a lot, it got pulled out about once
     a year for revival projects. Anthony felt that in 1992 it would be
     a good idea to expose a lot of people downtown to the language of
     Cobra -- there is a kind of language that Cobra demands the player
     deal with: juxtapositions of extremely different textures,
     extremely different genres; the idea that you're not always
     playing in the soloist-versus-ensemble textures. A lot of things
     he felt weren't getting considered so much on the downtown scene.
     So he and John got the idea together and passed it to Michael Dorf
     that different ensembles each month should play the game of Cobra
     the last Sunday of every month at the Knitting Factory. A lot of
     the groups that played Cobra are standing groups downtown. This
     was intentional; it was always supposed to be people who are used
     to playing together with some slight additions, coming to grips
     with this piece. Some of them are more clearly ensembles than
     others. For example March is essentially the Jazz Passengers plus
     friends; August was organized between Anthony and God is My
     Co-Pilot; May is Joe Galantz's Illuminati Cobra; December was
     Steve Bernstein's Spanish Fly Cobra; September is Walter Johnson's
     Big Band; and so on.

     V: It's surprising that these units can then disassemble in the
     course of the Cobra. Just thinking about the March one, for
     example, the way it flows from feedback to the jazz/rock
     arrangements. Was it ever a challenge that the groups would play
     more or less what they are used to?
     Y: The thing about it is this -- by the very nature of the game of
     Cobra there are two things that make it kind of impossible to not
     disassemble: the hidden language of Cobra is disruption and a lack
     of continuity. Anybody in the game has the power at any time to
     throw the prompter a sign, so that means you've got eight to 12
     musicians who are equal players as opposed to, "Well, this is the
     head, and we don't do anything until this," and so on. The other
     thing that's interesting in Cobra is that -- because John is John
     -- at any point a person can become a guerrilla and break all the
     rules of Cobra, or form a squad with other players and this
     guerrilla squad can play highly complicated subgames, which break
     up the texture that other people are trying to impose. Socially
     speaking, it becomes impossible for people to just do their normal
     stuff, yet still you want to come together as a group to make some
     satisfying thing.

     V: Is there a month that is particularly satisfying?
     Y: March is a great example of a woolly bear of a piece because it
     keeps going on and you think that it's just gotten to the point
     that it's getting tired and it revives itself and moves forward
     again. That's a very sweet piece, that one. I think there are a
     couple others that are important because of the aural sound. Some
     of the groups are standing ensembles, and some were more
     conceptual. David Shea's Cobra in February was all samplers except
     for one cello, giving Cobra a very special sound. Eric Chin in
     April did an all vocal Cobra which again led to a very special
     sound in the ensemble.

     V: Yeah, that did strike me as one of the more unusual pieces.
     Perhaps you can elaborate on the construction of the April Cobra.
     Y: From what I remember we wanted to have six men and six women on
     the Cobra, and we wanted to get a balance of ranges. Kevin Sharpe
     is in a hardcore band called the Brutal Truth -- he's the guy who
     does the amazing screams at the very beginning.

     V: He's the one -- those are something. And then when some of the
     people would also start to carry a tune, like the "Very very month
     of May" verse...
     Y: Oh yeah, Jeff Buckley is actually singing that.

     V: Sure, it's much more explicit, how you can hear in a crude way
     how the pieces work.
     Y: Let's put it this way: some months were more, for lack of a
     better word, abstract than others in their approach to musical
     change, or juxtaposition, or genre. Part of the game of Cobra is
     that when a downbeat happens and a call hits, they can do whatever
     they want. So some months, like July, are really a bunch of free
     improvisers from the A. Mika Bunker SIC Noise Squad and they're
     very used to doing no genre, no nothing -- just improv. So you got
     this guy on the guitar doing screeches and someone blowing up a
     balloon and rubbing it up against the microphone, while on the
     other hand you've got Jeff Buckley singing "Merry Month of May."
     That's part of what made it interesting to have different
     ensembles doing it -- the material is open.

     V: One month where it seems like they get close to playing in
     unison but never quite succumb is December. Or maybe they're not
     resisting playing together so much as toying with it.
     Y: That was Steve Bernstein's. It's essentially Spanish Fly and
     friends; again a different set of the downtown scene. Steve and
     Spanish Fly have a kind of vaudevillian way of improv, which comes
     out quite clearly in the December Cobra. It's kind of a more
     user-friendly Cobra with incredibly jokey references coming in.
     It's perfect for the record, with Paul Shapiro, I think, playing
     "Santa Claus is Coming to Town" at the very beginning.

     V: Right, where that one is user-friendly, on others the sheer
     noise is sometimes astounding, and I really felt the urge to see
     what was going on up there on stage. How hard is it to reproduce
     on disc and capture the full live effect of the sessions?
     Y: I think that for the most part this disc holds up as a musical
     construct -- I was actually amazed at that because often you're
     just trying to get through it, trying to make sure people
     understand what's going on and where it's going. If the game gets
     in the way of being able to think on your feet as a musician,
     you're just making noise, not playing anything worthwhile. And we
     got around that much of the time to actually create moments of
     real substance. I do think it has its own integrity.

                             [Voyager Website]

